## 17.3 Lesson Plan - Project Presentations

In this lecture, your students will present their project apps to the class. They’ll afterwards answer open-floor questions from you, TAs and classmates. This is a **crucial** lecture for your students, so make sure you follow the advice in this plan. 

##### Instructor Priorities

* Students should expect an extended class today--these presentations tend to last longer than our allotted time. 

* Students should know the parts of their apps that impress you and the TAs, as well as what they can improve on for future projects. This will help direct their focus for future assignments (what aspects of web development they need to work on).

##### Instructor Notes

* **Absolutely** read the [video protocol guide](Supplemental/Trilogy_VideoProtocol.docx). You'll find a timeline of steps you should follow leading up to and following today's class. 
  * The guide also contains visual instructions for setting up a camera and microphone to record your student's presentation. 

- - -

### Class Objectives

* _Arrive early to class_ so that you can set the room up for presentations: camera, microphone and the rest of your equipment.

* To provide students more time and support for their group projects.

- - -

### -1. Instructor Do: Set Up Your Equipment (15 mins before class)

* Come to class early and find a suitable spot to place your camera. Set up the microphone system as well. Don't spend class time assembling your gear.

### 0. Instructor Do: Welcome Class (1 min)

* Say your hellos and check if students have any questions about past concepts.

### 1. Introduce Presentations

* Congratulate your class for developing their projects to a state worth presenting. Assure them that they should take pride in what they've done over a mere nine weeks of training!

* Tell students to deploy their latest changes to GitHub. When they demonstrate their project, they'll clone their files to the projector's computer.

  * Make sure groups have deployed their app to Heroku, as well. We want to see their projects in action.

* Give students a rundown of how they're presentations should pan out.

  1. They should last about eight minutes, followed by two-to-four minutes of open-floor Q&A.
  2. They should speak **into** the microphone--this ensures we capture high-quality audio for their recorded presentation.
  3. They need to show confidence! All of them have contributed to impressive projects--they need to recognize and project that during their demonstrations.

* Ask which groups would like to go first, then second, then third and so on. When groups stop responding, assign the remaining teams to random slots (and write this list down).

### 2. Presentations Pt.1

* Go down the list and send each group up to the front of class. Give students roughly three minutes of setup time.

* When a group nears the 9-minute mark, motion for them to draw their presentation to a close (like pointing to your watch/imaginary watch). **Don't say anything**--you don't want your voice to interrupt their talk especially since you're recording them.

* Follow each of these presentations up with questions about their projects. Let TAs and classmates ask questions, too.

* When the Q&A session ends, stop recording. When the camera is off, point out what you found impressive and what they can improve on for future demonstrations.

* When a group finishes after 12pm, announce a break.

### 3. BREAK

### 4. Presentations Pt.2

* Just like in step 2, send each group up to the front of class when their turn comes. 

* When the last group finishes, give them an estimate for when they can expect to have their recorded presentations. Tell each of them that they should put their demonstrations up on LinkedIn, along with links to their GitHub and Heroku deployments.

* Congratulate them! It's challenging to conceive, develop and present a new web app. Remind them how much they've learned over the past 4 months, and tell them to begin thinking ahead to what they'll create for their final projects of the course.

* Dismiss the class.

## Copyright

Coding Boot Camp © 2017. All Rights Reserved.
